First GradeOur American Heritage

In the first grade, students continue their introduction to United States history 
through the study of selected historical figures. In the history strand, students 
study the important contributions each historical person made. 
In the geography strand, students learn about where these historical people lived 
and explore important basic geographic concepts. 
The civics strand provides a study of the positive character traits exhibited by 
these important historical figures. 
The economics strand continues the introduction of basic economic concepts.

Historical Understandings

SS1H1 
    Read about and describe the life of historical figures in American history. 
        a. Identify the contributions made by these figures: Benjamin Franklin (inventor/author/ statesman), Thomas Jefferson (Declaration of Independence), Meriwether Lewis and William Clark with Sacagawea (exploration), Theodore Roosevelt (National Parks and the environment), George Washington Carver (science), and Ruby Bridges (civilrights). 
        b. Describe how everyday life of these historical figures is similar to and different from everyday life in the present (for example: food, clothing, homes, transportation, communication, recreation, etc.).

Geographic Understandings

SS1G1 
    Describe how each historic figure in [SS1H1a] was influenced by his or her time and place. 
        a. American colonies (Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson)
        b. American frontier (Lewis & Clark and Sacagawea)
        c. National Parks (Theodore Roosevelt)
        d. Southern U.S. (George Washington Carver and Ruby Bridges)

SS1G2 
    Identify and locate the student’s city, county, state, nation (country), and continent on a simple map or a globe.

SS1G3 
    Locate major topographical features of the earth’s surface. 
        a. Locate all of the continents: North America, South America, Africa, Europe, Asia, Antarctica, and Australia.
        b. Locate the major oceans:  Arctic, Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Ocean.
        c. Identify and describe landforms (mountains, deserts, valleys, and coasts).

Government/Civic Understandings

SS1CG1 
    Describe how the historical figures in [SS1H1a] display positive character traits such as: fairness, respect for others, respect for the environment, courage, equality, tolerance, perseverance, and commitment.

SS1CG2 
    Explore the concept of patriotism through the words in the songs America (My Country ‘Tis of Thee) and America the Beautiful (for example: brotherhood, liberty, freedom, pride, etc.)

Economic Understandings

SS1E1 
    Identify goods that people make and services that people provide for eachother.

SS1E2 
    Explain that scarcity is when unlimited wants are greater than limited resources.

SS1E3 
    Describe how people are both producers and consumers.
    
SS1E4 
    Explain that people earn income byworking and that they must make choices about how much to save and spend