Second Grade Georgia,My State

In second grade, the various social studies strands become interwoven withthe historical strand. 
The history strand focuses on important historical figures in Georgia and the Creek and Cherokee 
cultures in Georgia. The geography strand emphasizes the geography of Georgia and relates to the 
historical study. In addition to the positive character traits of the individuals and groups in 
the historical strand, the basic concept of government is also introduced. Basic economics concepts 
continue to be introduced.

Historical Understandings

SS2H1 
    Describe the lives and contributions of historical figures in Georgia history. 
        a. James Oglethorpe, Tomochichi, and MaryMusgrove (founding of Georgia)
        b. Sequoyah (development of a Cherokee alphabet) 
        c. Jackie Robinson (sportsmanship and civil rights)
        d. Martin Luther King, Jr. (civil rights)
        e. Juliette Gordon Low (Girl Scouts and leadership)
        f. Jimmy Carter (leadership and human rights) 
        
SS2H2 
    Describe the Georgia Creek and Cherokee cultures of the past in terms of tools, clothing, homes, ways of making a living, and accomplishments. 
        a.Compare and contrast the Georgia Creek and Cherokee cultures of the past to those of Georgians today. 
        
Geographic Understandings

SS2G1 
    Locate and compare major topographical features of Georgia and describe how these features define Georgia’s surface. 
        a. Locate and compare the geographic regions of Georgia: Blue Ridge, Piedmont, Coastal Plain, Ridge and Valley, and Appalachian Plateau. 
        b. Locate on a physical mapthe majorrivers: Savannah, Flint,and Chattahoochee. 

SS2G2 
    Describe the cultural and geographic systems associated with the historical figures in SS2H1 and Georgia’s Creek and Cherokee in SS2H2. 
        a. Identify specific locations significant to the life and times of each historic figure, and the Creek and Cherokee, on a political or physical map. 
        b. Describe how each historic figure and the Creek and Cherokee adapted to and were influenced by their environments. 
        c. Describe how the region in which these historic figures lived affected their lives and compare these regions to the region in which students live. 
        d. Describe the regions in Georgia where the Creek and Cherokee lived and how the people used their local resources. 
        
Government/Civic Understandings.
    
SS2CG1 
    Define the concept of government and the need for rules and laws. 
    
SS2CG2 
    Identify the following elected officials of the executive branch and where they work: 
        a. President (leader of our nation) and Washington, D.C. –White House
        b. Governor (leader of our state) and Atlanta, GA –State Capitol Building
        c. Mayor (leader of a city) and city hall
        
SS2CG3 
    Give examples of how the historical figures in SS2H1 demonstrate positive citizenship traits such as: honesty, dependability, trustworthiness, honor, civility, good sportsmanship, patience, and compassion.Economic Understandings

SS2E1 
    Explain that because of scarcity, people must make choices that result in opportunity costs.

SS2E2 
    Identify some ways in which goods and services are allocated (such as: price,majority rule, contests, force, sharing, lottery, authority, first-come-first-served, and personal characteristics). 

SS2E3 
    Explain that people usually use money to obtain the goods and services they want and explain how money makes trade easier than barter.

SS2E4 
    Describe the costs and benefits of personal saving and spending choices.
