Historical Understandings

SS3H1 
    Describe early American Indian cultures and their development in North America.
        a. Locate the regions where American Indians settled in North America: Arctic, Northwest Southwest, Plains, Northeast, and Southeast.
        b. Compare and contrast how American Indians in each region used their environment to obtain food, clothing, and shelter.
        c. Discuss how American Indians continue to contribute to American life (e.g., arts, literature).

SS3H2 
    Describe European exploration in North America.
        a. Describe the reasons for and obstacles to the exploration of North America.
        b. Describe the accomplishments of: John Cabot (England), Vasco Núñez de Balboa (Spain), Hernando de Soto(Spain), Christopher Columbus (Spain), Henry Hudson (The Netherlands), and Jacques Cartier (France).
        c. Describe examples of cooperation and conflict between European explorers and American Indians.
        
SS3H3 
    Explain the factors that shaped British Colonial America.
        a. Identify key reasons why the New England, Mid-Atlantic, and Southern colonies were founded (religious freedomand profit).
        b. Compare and contrast colonial life in the New England, Mid-Atlantic, and Southern colonies (education, economy, and religion). 
        c. Describe colonial life in America from the perspectives of various people: large landowners, farmers, artisans, women, children, indentured servants, slaves, and American Indians.

Geographic Understandings
    
SS3G1
    Locate major topographical features on a physical map of the United States.
        a. Locate major rivers of the United States of America: Mississippi, Ohio, Rio Grande, Colorado, Hudson, and St. Lawrence.
        b. Locate major mountain ranges of the United States of America: Appalachian, Rocky. 
        
SS3G2 
    Locate and describe the equator, prime meridian, and lines of latitude and longitude on a globe.

SS3G3 
    Describe how physical systems affect human systems.
        a. Explain why American Indian groups occupied the areas they did (SS3H1a), with emphasis on why some developed permanent villages and others did not.
        b. Describe how the early explorers (SS3H2a) adapted, or failed to adapt, to the various physical environments in which they traveled.
        c. Explain how the physical geography of the New England, Mid-Atlantic, and Southern colonies helped determine economic activities.
        
Government/Civic Understandings

SS3CG1 
    Describe the elements of representative democracy/republicin the United States. 
        a. Describe the three branches of national government: executive (president), legislative (Congress), and judicial (Supreme Court of the United States).
        b. Describe the three branches of state government: executive (governor), legislative (Georgia General Assembly), and judicial (Supreme Court of Georgia).
        c. State the main responsibility of each branch: executive (enforcing laws), legislative (making laws), judicial (determining if laws are fair).
        
SS3CG2 
    Explain the importance of Americans sharing certain central democratic beliefs and principles, both personal and civic.
        a. Explain the necessity of respecting the rights of others and promoting the common good.
        b. Explain the necessity of obeying reasonable laws/rules voluntarily, and explain why it is important for citizens in a democratic society to participate in public (civic) life (staying informed, voting, volunteering, and communicating with public officials).

Economic Understandings

SS3E1
    Define and give examples of the four types of productive resources.
        a. Natural (land)
        b. Human (labor)
        c. Capital (capital goods)
        d. Entrepreneurship (risk-taking and combining natural, human, and capital resourcesin an attempt to make a profit)
        
SS3E2 
    Explain that governments provide certain types of goods and services in a market economy (schools, libraries, roads, police/fire protection, and military) and pay for these through taxes.
    
SS3E3
    Give examples of interdependence and trade and explain the benefits of voluntary exchange. 
        a. Describe the interdependence of consumers and producers.
        b. Describe how goods and services are allocated by price in the marketplace.
        c. Explain that some goods are made locally, some elsewhere in the country, and some in other countries.
        d. Explain that most countries create their own currency for use as money.

SS3E4 
    Explain the concept of opportunity costas it relatesto making a saving or spending choice.